---
title: ParTweet
categories:
  - Twitter
  - Politics
  - NLP
---

[ParTweet](http://www.partweet.com/) predicts political alignment of twitter users. Try it yourself.
The idea is simple, tweets with relevant political content can contain enough information
to infer what a user thinks (and will vote?).

## Data overview

First of all the data. I found a large dataset of tweets from US politicians, more than a million
entries. The dataset presented a couple of challenges. First of all not all tweets are necessary about politics, or 
related topics. I decided to create a small dataset selecting randomly 1k tweets and adding another
1k tweets from another independent dataset, then I labeled by hand whether each entry was on topic or not.

The second challenge is that we need to assign a political orientation to the content of each tweet. 
The only way to do it in a reasonable amount was to assume that all of the (political) tweets of 
a certain author correspond to its orientation. So I labeled each politician as either Democrat or Republican, and
used that as a loose label for its tweets.


## Processing and training

Done with labeling we can see if there are correlations and if predictions are possible.
Given a collection of tweets from an account we would like to filter them, keeping only those
about relevant topics, and use them to classify the user. 

I trained a linear SVM on the hand labeled set to predict for relevant topic. The f1-score is around
0.8 on the test set. Not bad considering that the train set is less than two thousand entries, and the complexity of the task. The aforementioned model was used to extract from the initial dataset only the most useful tweets,
leaving still more than half a million of them. Many of them include hashtags and handles of other twitter accounts
so I decided to use a tf-idf representation as the first step for the party classifier. 
Then again a linear SVM was employed. The results on single tweets were not promising, probably due to noise 
and the fact that not all tweets really align with a certain view. How can we fix it?
Summing together the vector representation of few tweets is enough to drastically increase the accuracy.
Already with groups of 5 of them I could reach 95% or more. 

So finally we have a way to predict political alignment of small groups of tweets. 
How can we translate it into a label for a given user?
We can take a large number of tweets from the used (1k or more), randomly group them 5 by 5, apply 
our SVM classifier and then use the predictions average to decide whether the user is Democrat, Republican, or uncertain.
To test this method I applied it to a test dataset I created excluding the tweets of 50 politicians from my training set.
The accuracy is more than 90%.



## Web app

Finally I decided to deploy a Flask web app to let everybody play with it. 
Once you enter a twitter user handle the app downloads up to 1.5k of its latest tweets.
Then it applies all of the above, filtering for topic, labeling, party orientation prediction and 
returns the result with a cute gauge animation (using [justgage](http://www.http://justgage.com//)).
It also prints a random tweet which should hint at the political views of that user.  


My code as always is on my GitHub [repo](https://github.com/roundedup) if somebody wants to play with it.
